CP363 – Assignment 1 

 

Despite the rise of online media distribution public libraries are still widely used by all sorts of people and remain significant, multi-purpose institutions. A wide variety of people frequently use the services of libraries which means that libraries themselves need to be operated using databases which can accommodate for the different types of media they store, organize, and maintain. With such a system, a library is much more easily able to keep track of whether books, DVDs, CDs, and more are being borrowed or are overdue and if so, keep track of the people borrowing the media in question. 

The database would be made up of two core components: people and items. The generic person entity with attributes representing common identifiers of people such as name, location, age, gender, and email address. Location and gender are both foreign keys, with location relating to an address entity that has attributes for street, city, unit #, and postal code, while gender has a corresponding table with attributes of male, female, non-binary, and other. Along with this there are three different entities representing the people that are part of the library’s operations.  

The first of the three are library clientele. Library clientele are end users who are registered with the library and have their own library card; these entities have attributes for name, location, age, and gender taken from the person entity, as well as their own unique attributes for card information and unique member ID. Card information is a foreign key which references another entity representing a library card that has attributes for card ID, registration date, and expiry date. The card ID for each member’s library card is derived from their member ID. 

The second of the three are library staff. Library staff are both application programmers and end users who have the same basic person attributes (name, age, etc.) and their own unique attributes for salary, position, login, hiring date, and staff ID (with their ID being the primary key). Every staff member’s login attribute is a foreign key corresponding to an entity for login info which contains their login ID/staff ID, password, and a set of permissions which corresponds to their position within the library. Along with this, library staff have the same privileges as library clientele, except that their associated library card entity has their card ID derived from staff ID, the registration date is derived from hiring date, and expiry date is set to Null.  

The third of the three are system administrators, who are a subset of library staff. System administrators have their own database login ID and database password attributes separate from the main login entity, as well as email address, position, name, and staff ID attributes like that of other staff. System administrators are end users and DBAs who interact with the DBMS using a data manipulation language. It should also be noted that some system administrators such as hiring managers and general library managers will have the functions of DAs as they will be able to hire new staff and let go of current staff.  

The second core component of the database are items who are generic entities that contain six attributes: the first five are availability, type, author, category, and format; while the fifth is the primary key for the item’s ID. The item entity branches off into three types of items: books, film, and music; each of which are their own entities in the database.  

The author attributes for all three item categories are foreign keys which reference an author entity with a name attribute, an author ID as its primary key, and a category ID as a foreign key. Similarly, genre and publisher are also both foreign keys which type back to entities named category and publisher, respectively. The author, category, and publisher entities are all connected directly to the item entity itself. Category has a primary key of category ID, and additional attributes for category name and genre, while publisher has a primary key of publisher ID, and attributes for name and location, with the latter connecting back to the address entity mentioned previously. Lastly, the format attribute is a foreign key which references a format entity based on the physical distribution media of the item. 

The first and most significant item type, books, have attributes for author, title, genre, publication date, publisher, ISBN, and a book ID which serves as their primary key. All books will either be of the physical book or electronic book (or E-book) format. The second item type is film, each of which have attributes of title, author, genre, release date, publisher, and movie ID for their primary key. Films have multiple formats which will all be dependent on their physical distribution medium. Lastly, music has attributes of title, author, genre, publisher, and a primary key of music ID.  

As for relationships, the main relationship which connects the two core components is a one-to-many relationship between members and items. This is a ternary relationship, also containing an entity for borrowing which contains attributes for member ID, item ID, issue date, return date, and late fees/fines. As for smaller relationships, all the types of people represented in the database as well as publishers have attributes relating to various other tables such as address, login info, and library card. While the item entity has one-to-many relationships with publisher, author, and category, as well as one-to-one relationships with the distinct types of items underneath it. 